---
date: "2017-03-27"
title: "Reed: Search for jobs via bots"
author: Martin Kearn
---

Reed are the UK’s number one recruitment site and are keen to extend their reach
to new and existing customer via chat bots.

Core Team

-   Martin Kearn (Microsoft, \@MartinKearn)

-   Maria Vrabie (Microsoft)

-   Gopi Balasingam (Reed)

-   David Finnegan (Reed)

-   Sangeeta Naik (Reed)

-   Yos Noor (Reed)

-   Gary Hubbard (Reed)

Parter Profile
--------------

Reed are the UK's number job se (<https://www.reed.co.uk>). Each month, more
than 7 million jobseekers turn to reed.co.uk in their search for work, making
over 160,000 applications every day.

Reed offer jobs across 42 industry specialisms, from thousands recruiters across
the UK and beyond.

For jobseekers Reed provides a full online service for anyone looking for a new
job. Reed advertise vacancies on behalf of employers and recruitment agencies
who are looking for staff.

For recruiters Reed works with thousands of organisations to fulfil their online
recruitment needs. Direct employers and recruitment agencies can choose from a
range of services, including: job advertising with full applicant management, CV
search, a platform for specifically hiring temporary staff, branding, display
advertising and email services.

Problem Statement
-----------------

Reed already have a successful app and a website, however they are looking as
broader reach as possible and see bots as another way to reach potential
candidiates.

Reed wish to enable job search via chat bots such that users can interact with
Reed via social media apps such as Skype and Facebook Messenger. Reed anticipate
that this new medium will give them a competitive advantage in eth recruitment
industry.

Reed would also like users to be proactively informed of suitable job
opportunities as they arise.

Reed also

Solution 1: Job Search Bot
--------------------------

During the hack exercise,

The solution was a bot which guides users through what is effectviely an
advanced search.

The bot would then show results and allow users to click through to the website
where the job opportunity can be explored.

Users would specify various parameters such as:

-   Keywords (i.e. IT Consultant, Teacher, Accountant)

-   Location (i.e London, Birmingham, Reading)

-   Salary band (i.e. £30k)

Solution 2: FAQ Bot
-------------------

Technical Delivery
------------------

The bot was written using the [Microsoft Bot
Fraemwork](https://dev.botframework.com/) with C\#.

Conclusion
----------

Additional resources
--------------------
